[THEME MUSIC]
>> There is an important and
interesting symbolic method
for relating the whole
gnostic Sophia tradition
to the mythology of Egypt.
The Egyptian symbol, which
allows our imagination
to comprehend aspects of the
gnostic way of understanding,
is the symbol of the scarab,
perhaps specifically,
the scarabaeus sacer,
commonly referred
to as the sacred scarab.
But the association of
the scarab and Sophia
is not in any way
easily apparent.
The reproduction
process of the scarab
is an emulation of
a symbolic Earth.
This is where Sophia and the
scarab conjoin as mythology.
Sophia is a force of energy
that materializes itself
as a sphere of the Earth.
In that sphere of
the Earth, her forces
are the emanating factors
which reproduce themselves
as human life.
Likewise, the scarab will
gather up a ball of dung,
mold it into a sphere,
and begin rolling it.
During the day, the
scarab rolls the ball
in a direction that is
oppositional to the movement
of the sun.
As the sun moves from east to
west, wherever a scarab is,
it will start pushing its dung
ball in the opposite direction.
The scarab takes organic
matter and forms it
into a ball as Sophia
did with her own energy.
She formed the ball and
put inside that ball
her goddess forces.
As the scarab rolls the ball,
it will find a little cavern,
or excavate a hole.
There, it carefully
spends days making
the ball into a perfect
sphere, molding it, shaping it.
Then it will insert
into the ball its eggs.
Then, just like Sophia,
the forces of life
are planted into her
creation of the Earth.
Ancient Egyptians in
observing beetles emerged
from the ball of dung
believed that this behavior
was an anomaly.
They assumed that
the male beetle
was able to reproduce
without needing
a female in a mode
of reproduction
requiring only one sex,
called parthenogenesis.
They saw this behavior
as a metaphor for Sophia
giving birth to herself.
The whole gnostic myth is
that Sophia has no counterpart
and that the Christos is
not her mate, but someone
who brings about the sense
of limitation and order.
Gnostic belief is that Sophia's
self-birthing process is
parthenogenetic--
birth through a single being.
They believed that
Sophia and the scarabs
shared this behavior,
if only in metaphor.
The Egyptians personified
the scarabaeus sacer
through the god, Khepri,
which in Egyptian means,
I am the becoming.
This passage is from the
Egyptian Book of the Dead--
"I am he who is
constantly appearing,
whose real nature is unknown.
I am yesterday.
He who has seen a million
years is one name of mine.
I pass along the waves
of those sky beings
who determine destinies.
I am the master of eternity,
ordering how I am fated,
like the great beetle."
This just begins the association
between the scarab, Sophia,
and the Kamutef.
Kamutef is a twin god
from Egypt who was
a combination of Ra and Min.
The Kamutef is the one
who gives birth to itself,
and who throws off
the cocoon and emerges
as a creature of flight.
The scarab rolls the ball
of dung in conjunction
with the movement
of the sun and moon.
Their gestational period
is 28 days, almost exactly
a lunar cycle.
28 is 4 times 7.
Through a spiral of seven,
the emergence of life
and that of death is
the same Sophian process
of the destruction and creation
of another phase of humanity.
The Egyptians modeled that
conception as the scarab.
At this point, it might
be valuable to trace
the origins of the gnostic
myth of Sophia back
to their beginnings in
both the Egyptian mythology
and Vedic mythology.
We have seen that by associating
Sophia with the scarab
and emphasizing the
idea of parthenogenesis,
that the whole sequence of the
scarab giving birth actually
involves, or implicates, all
three feminine archetypes--
that of the virgin, the
mother, and the crone.
The Sophia myth is
archetypal through the idea
of parthenogenesis
to the Kamutef,
and also, geometrically,
to the idea of a square.
A square is a phenomenon
that one could
say gives birth to itself.
It multiplies.
A square is a
multiplication of a number,
or an entity with and by itself.
We talked about that already
with the number of the Yuga.
These mysteries are
released once you seek out
the root of a number, the square
root, and also its expansion
into space, the
squaring of a number.
Remember the number
of the Yuga is 6,048.
When you find its square
root, it is 7.777.
Then, if you square
the Yuga, you
get a number that has roughly
the value of the solar year--
365 and a continuing decimal--
365.78304.
These are the
cross-fertilization numbers
within the Yuga number,
a dense intersection
of mythological imagery
and narration with geometry
and numerical values.
This is the kind
of thought process
that the mind of
ancient Egypt and India
held as being a sacred
faculty of human intelligence.
If we move this
parthenogenetic principle
into the Egyptian
myth, one of the most
prominent relationships
that we make immediately
is between Sophia and Isis.
In the myth of Isis,
Horus, and Osiris,
there is a dark
figure called Set,
whose name is associated
with the number seven,
and therefore in relationship
with the destructive aspects
and necessities of
the end of the cycle.
The myth goes that Set
deceives his brother,
Osiris, and builds a coffin.
Set says that it's a coffin
for some other associate that
has died.
But he wants Osiris to
lay down in the coffin
so he can make sure it's the
right fit, or the right size.
Remember that we are
dealing with the symbol
of the entire human
species when we're
telling stories of Osiris.
Osiris was the
figure in this age
that gave humanity the
principles of urbanization
and agriculture.
He is an archetype of the Yuga.
All the gifts of Osiris
mark the same period of time
as the start of the Kali Yuga.
Then Set uses deception to
nail humanity into confinement
and an enclosure of darkness.
Then he sets the
coffin out to sea.
After flowing through the ocean
of time, the coffin breaks up
and the body of Osiris
is revealed again,
where Set uses his sword to
cut Osiris into 14 pieces.
Most believe that
there are 14 pieces
and the entire body
collectively represents 15.
We have already discovered
that the relationship
between 14 and 15 is
a key to understanding
the cycles of time.
Throughout various
interpretations,
myth and mathematics trigger
different levels of awareness
concerning the actualities of
our position in time and space.
Isis then goes to seek out the
severed pieces of her husband.
She finds only the
phallus of Osiris
and she knows that the
only way to bring him back
is through a rebirth.
This is exactly the Yuga story.
The only way we can bring
this Yuga to a close
is through death and
rebirth on a species level.
In esoteric geometry,
the phallus, or at least
the head of the
phallus, is equated
to the shape of the Pentagon.
This becomes a symbol of the
reproductive power of form.
There are three
aspects to the concept
of the soul in ancient Egypt.
These are the Ka,
the Ba, and the Ahk.
Let's get into understanding
all three of these aspects.
We will start with the Ka.
The Ka is the physical
body and the spirit
that is embedded in substance.
The Ka remains behind on
Earth until the decomposition
of the body.
The Ka is one of the
most complicated aspects
of the human soul.
Egyptians believed
that a field of energy
that is sevenfold in nature
exists around the body
of a human being.
There are seven
different vibrations
contained within the Ka.
These vibrations emanate
from seven centers, which
are known in India as chakras.
Each one of these participates
as an emanating frequency which
builds up the body of the Ka.
A major part of the
psychophysical science of Egypt
is associated with the Ka.
It is interesting that
the Ka and the centers
are based on the
number 7, which is
the basis of the Yuga system.
This carries the vibrational
content and structure
of the Earth and moon, which
is also a seven-fold number
and a seven-fold system.
The body of man
is a continuation
of that same resonant cycle.
When we look even
deeper into the atom
and molecular bindings, we
find a similar resonance
to the time cycles that mark
the duration of the Yuga.
The Ka is an energy
which surrounds the body
but can be loosened
from the body
through initiated practices.
In the West, we call this
practice astral travel.
One can actually employ a means
to disassociate this energy
from the physical body
for certain experiences.
The Egyptians made
this energy body
the basis of what we call
the invention of kingship.
Kingship is based on the Ka.
The Egyptians had a
ceremonial procedure
in which they premeditated
the potentiality of a person's
death, particularly a pharaoh.
The dying pharaoh would
enter into a ceremony
with the pharaoh that
is to take his place,
and they would disassociate
the Ka from the dying pharaoh
and associate it
around the new pharaoh.
The pharaoh's Ka
was his royalty.
His kingship was
based upon not only
the crown, which cuts
off and signifies
the crown of the
head, but also that he
has a Ka of 14 energy fields,
twice that of normal people.
That is the key idea in the
great concept of kingship,
which was essential
to the hierarchy that
led to civilization.
The symbol for the
Ka looks like this.
This emulates the circle of
energy around the human body,
and that the energy
can be moved and spun.
Another aspect of the Egyptian
view of the soul is the Ba.
The Ba is the eternal
part of the soul.
At death, the body goes
back to the source.
This is the way the
Ka, through spinning,
creates a movement in which
we can experience the nature
of flight called astral travel.
There are always
different levels
built into these
simple, little glyphs
that the Egyptians chose.
All of them have a depth
of meaning that most of us
will never understand.
According to the
ancient Egyptians,
unless something is conveying
at least six different meanings
simultaneously, it's
not worth saying
and it's not worth thinking.
The other aspect the Trinity
found within the Egyptian soul
is the Ahk.
While the Ka is
associated with the body,
the Ahk is associated
with the spirit.
The Ka and the Ahk--
you can see how they inverse
in the way they are pronounced.
It's just a
reshuffling inversion
of the concepts of the
spirit and the body.
One is almost the mirror
reflection of the other.
This inversion of sounds
means that the Ka and the Ahk
are opposites.
In order to allow the Ka to
stay with the new pharaoh,
they mummified the old pharaoh.
They wrapped his body
and did everything
they could to maintain and
prevent the total decomposition
of the body.
That's what the mummification
process is all about.
They surrounded the
mummy of the dead pharaoh
with eight coffins, one for each
of the vibrations of the Ka.
That would be the seven
chakras and the Ka itself.
These coffins are
placed at a distance
from the mummified body
at the same distances
as the emanations of
those energies coming
from the body in life.
All of the Egyptian death
and afterlife practices
are based on the
science of the Ka.
Through mummification, they
maintain the continuity
of the Ka.
Through these
practices and rituals,
a collective memory
was passed from pharaoh
to pharaoh to pharaoh.
And he had an expanse
or an availability
of intelligence and memory
that far exceeded his people.
That was the reason
he was their leader.
Without this process, a true
sense of hierarchy cannot be
maintained.
Ancient Egyptians would call
today's system of hierarchy,
particularly in the
West, an utter fraud
because it does not have the
element of collective knowledge
endowment, which
they believed was
essential in creating a
hierarchy of the human species.
Egypt was an empire.
Egypt was a hierarchy.
They may have been the most
enlightened of empires,
but still, they are
part of the Kali Yuga.
The Egyptian empire
was established
and their history recorded
with hieroglyphs and in scrolls
on the exact date of the
beginning of the Kali Yuga.
Egypt was an attempt to save
the knowledge of the ancients.
They knew they had to conform
to the processes that ultimately
hastened the destruction
phase and transformation
phase of our species.
But at the same time, they
were intent on maintaining
and preserving some of the
higher knowledge of the past.
The Egyptians, through their
monuments, hieroglyphs,
and symbols, were.
Attempting to maintain the
knowledge that knowledge had
been gained through the previous
54,000 years of the first three
Yuga cycles of the over
60,000-year long Mahakalpa.
Some of the hieroglyphic-covered
granite blocks found in Egypt
could easily survive tens
of thousands of years
and still be readable.
Like seeing a great
storm approaching,
the Egyptians went out of
their way to save the past.
This is the great untold
story of ancient Egypt
and the vain attempt by
the pharaohs and priests
to preserve the sacred
knowledge of the Golden, Silver,
and Bronze ages through the
destruction and nightmare
of the coming Kali Yuga.
On that basis, we can expect to
find pre-Yuga knowledge guiding
Egyptian thought,
but modified so
that it fits within the boundary
of time within the Yuga.
We must understand how
it is possible for us
to participate in a transmission
and conveyance of what we are
and what we have achieved
in this final phase
of a great body of time that
necessitates an extinction.
As Buddha said, an
extinguishment and a rebirth.
Let's move our discussion to
another aspect of the science
of the soul, which is the Ahk.
The Ahk is an energy
field that always
remains as a configuration
within the ether
of the heavens.
The Egyptians believed
that they could
affect the vibratory
field of the sky
by bringing to it the soul
energy of their people.
Another way to look at this is
with a view from the Indians.
They believe that all beings
enter this world as food
and as food they all depart.
That is, we are
re-assimilated into the Ahk,
just like we assimilate food
on Earth, just as our blood
and flesh are
assimilated by the Earth
and give the Earth
a renewed spirit.
So it is that part of the human
soul that arrives at the Ahk
and gives energy to the field.
Bones have an amazing duration
of self-preservation built
into their molecular structure.
Some bones of African
Pygmies have been
tested to be 40,000 years old.
The skeleton has a
great power of endurance
and that is why it
represents the Ka.
The skeleton has a connection to
the highest level of the soul.
The Egyptians believed
that the leg bones--
the femur, the tibia, and the
fibula, and the arm bones--
the humerus, the radius, and the
ulna were of great importance.
That's also why the image
of the skull and bones
was used by the Templars
in their rituals.
The Egyptians believed that
in the core of the large bones
of the body were the minerals
which that person had
assimilated during
his life from eating,
from taking plants and
animals from the Earth.
They understood that all
of this was crystallized
in a mineral form in the bones.
That crystalline
substance of bones
held the vibratory
relationship to the Ahk.
At death, there is a
separation of the soul.
One aspect of the
soul, the Ba, belongs
with the beings in the heavens.
But the bones keep
a vibration that
is in tune with the Ka,
which stays here on Earth.
The Ka is a resonant
body with the Ahk.
The car can maintain itself
on Earth in relationship
to the bone structure
that is left behind.
The Ka returns to the Earth
for another incarnation
through the vibration
of the bones.
That way, you are constantly
reborn into the same pattern.
The third state in this division
of consciousness was in the Ba.
This is the immortal
state of existence.
This is the aspect
of consciousness
that reincarnates.
The Ba separates
from consciousness
at the moment of death and goes
back into the well of souls
to be reborn again.
In our current lexicon,
the word soul and spirit
mean essentially the same thing.
But looking at it
more closely, it
can be seen that the word soul
is actually referencing the Ba.
The Ba, or the soul, never dies.
It reincarnates and
continues its pilgrimage
towards illumination.
It has been described as
that spark of divinity
that resides within us all.
In the hieroglyphs
of Egypt, the Ba
is the part of us that
is conscious of leaving
the earth at death,
and therefore
is depicted as a winged
human or a human bird.
The bird symbol for
the Ba represents
the force that can free
itself from the Earth
and soar into the cosmos,
liberated from gravity
and the material realm.
This, then, is why the
cultures of the ancient world
held the elaborate funerary
ceremonies and rituals.
These were all
originally designed
to help these three aspects of
the soul find their way back.
The ghost of the human,
caught in the confusion
of the afterlife, is
guided back to their Ka.
Their transcendent
spirit, the Ahk,
goes back to its
place in the sky.
And the soul, the Ba returns
to the center of beingness.
We have talked
about an image that
appears at the midpoint
of the Temple of Luxor,
called the Kamutef.
The Kamutef embodies the
mythological characteristics
of the transformation
prophesied for the next phase
of human development.
We can show that this
image of the Kamutef
has a very clear mathematical
ratio of the golden mean
to one half.
That is emphasized by the
fact that the erect phallus
is raised up to the navel
and put into connection
with the maternal
or birthing process,
representing the nourishing
process of nature.
At the top of the Kamutef, his
head has the skull cap removed.
The symbolism here is that
the upper part of the body
is shown to be mummified.
Mummification in Egypt is a
symbol of the serpentine energy
having entered a cocoon.
Mummification and a
succession of coffins
also symbolize a cocoon.
The arms coming out
indicates the relationship
between the larva
and the butterfly.
That is a concept that
they held applicable
to the whole development
of the human species,
that we have the
potential to move
from an Earth-bound
creature, which
has enclosed itself as a
larva, and then emerges
from that process.
The larva is, of course, a
symbol of the physical Earth.
We can emerge from
that as a butterfly,
a creature of flight, a
creature of the higher
spheres of existence.
Now that creature
of flight is also
built into the verbalization
of this image, the Kamutef,
because the aspect of
the human organism that
can, even in its present
state, be detached
from the physical body and
travel through the Earth
and through the heavens
is the Ka, the energy
field that surrounds our body.
The prediction of Egypt for the
future evolution of our species
is that we will become more
assimilated to the less
densified form of ourselves,
which is the Ka, the energy
field surrounding us.
There is the possibility
that these people
are informed by a
kind of possession
of the spirits of the dead.
The Egyptians
believed that there
were spirits who
were intentionally
captive on the Earth
in the same way
that pharaonic priests
captivated the spirit
energy of one pharaoh and
passed it on to another.
We know that such
knowledge for manipulating
the Ka, which is an Egyptian
concept of the localized
spirit of a person, did exist
as it is written in hieroglyphs.
After the defeat of
Mark Antony by Octavian
and the subsequent suicidal
death of Cleopatra,
Egypt became a Roman province in
30 BC and the pharaonic people
were faced with the
decision of whether to live
under the despotic rule and
potential imprisonment of Rome,
or to seek refuge in Africa.
Many sought the latter, as
is evident by the knowledge
discovered in various Western
African cultures, principally
that of the Dogon tribe in Mali.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
For example, the Dogon,
located and identified the star
Sirius as culturally
significant,
similar to the Egyptians.
All this, thousands of years
before modern technology
could confirm the
existence of these stars.
This is the kind of conjecture,
albeit controversial,
at which we can only
arrive with imagination.
When we have a very limited
amount of factuality,
we can use apparent
things as a way
of supporting our imaginations.
There are certain
apparent things
with which we can
extend our imagination
through the use of symbols.
This is when a thing becomes
the symbol for something else.
This type of working will never
take on the type of knowledge
that is associated
with facts because that
is forbidden and is maintained
under the guise of secrecy
and secret societies.
That is what initiation means.
In the next episode, we
expand our understanding
of the Ka, the Ba, and
the Ahk by examining
their symbolic meaning as
the physical, intellectual,
and spiritual
developments of man.
[MUSIC PLAYING]